add derived task ID language (#217)
hubverse-org/hubDocs: docs/source/user-guide/tasks.md

For example, in our [Running Example 1](#running-example-1), the task ID variables are `target`, `location`, and `origin_date`.
In this example, `target` is the target key and can only take on one value, "inc covid hosp".

#### Derived Task ID variables

Each model output is defined on the unique combinations across the task ID
variables. For example, across 10 `origin_date`s and 50 `location`s, there are
500 unique combinations of tasks because both of these variables are
independent from one another. Some task ID variables have a more direct
relationship. One example is `target_date`, which is the date of occurrence of
the outcome of interest. This task ID is specific for modelling efforts in that
it is _derived_ from the `origin_date` and `horizon` task ID.

> If we had 4 `horizon` values, along with the 10 `origin_dates`, we would have a total of 40 `target_date`s. There are 20,000 _unique_ combinations across 10

Reviewer: While the walkthrough is useful, I think it would be easier to follow with smaller example numbers. Also the point that needs to be made more clearly is that there is a one to one relationship between a derived task id and the values it depends on. For example a forecast with a given `origin_date` `"2024-11-07"` and horizon `1` has only a single valid `"arget_date` value: `"2024-11-14"`, regardless of the complete list of `target_date` tas ID values.

Author: Done.

`origin_date`s, 50 `locations` and the 40 `target_dates`, but there are only
2,000 _valid and unique_ combinations. While this task ID is useful for modeling
and visualizations, it must be ignored during validation.

> In schemas version 4.0.0, we introduced `derived_task_ids` properties to enable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In schema version 4.0.0, we introduced `derived_task_ids` properties to enable
```

hub administrators to define derived task IDs (i.e. task IDs whose values
depend on the values of other task IDs). The higher level `derived_task_ids
property` sets the property globally at the hub level but can be overriden by
the round level `derived_task_ids` property. The property allows for primarily
validation functionality to ignore such task IDs when appropriate which can

> significantly improve validation efficency. For more information see the

Reviewer: We should also highlight here in bold that, if any of the task IDs a derived task ID depends on have required values, it is essential for derived_task_ids to be specified. If this is the case and derived task IDs are not specified, the dependent nature of derived task ID values will result in false validation errors when validating required values.

Author: Done in a4ba755f22937ea5763c44853f068070f320e9c6

For example, in our [Running Example 1](#running-example-1), the task ID variables are `target`, `location`, and `origin_date`.
In this example, `target` is the target key and can only take on one value, "inc covid hosp".

#### Derived Task ID variables

Each model output task is based on unique combinations of task ID values. For example, for a given `origin_date` which is a task ID which often acts as the round ID (let's say "2024-11-07"), 2 `location`s, and 2 `horizon` values, there are 4 unique tasks (1 `origin_date` × 2 `location`s × 2 `horizon`s). 

> 

Author: I think this make sense!

> **However, some task variables are derived directly from others.** For instance, `target_date` represents when the outcome of interest occurs and is calculated based on the `origin_date` and `horizon`. If the `origin_date` is "2024-11-07" and the `horizon` is 1 week, the `target_date` will be "2024-11-14." For a `horizon` of 2 weeks, the `target_date` will be "2024-11-21." Such task IDs therefore have **a one-to-one relationship** to values of the task IDs they are derived from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**However, some task ID variables are derived directly from others.** For instance, `target_date` represents when the outcome of interest occurs and is calculated based on the `origin_date` and `horizon`. If the `origin_date` is `"2024-11-07"` and the `horizon` is 1 week, the `target_date` will be `"2024-11-14"`. For a `horizon` of 2 weeks, the `target_date` will be `"2024-11-21"`. Such task IDs therefore have **a one-to-one relationship** to values of the task IDs they are derived from.
```

> **However, some task ID variables are derived directly from others.** For instance, `target_date` represents when the outcome of interest occurs and is calculated based on the `origin_date` and `horizon`. If the `origin_date` is `"2024-11-07"` and the `horizon` is 1 week, the `target_date` will be `"2024-11-14"`. For a `horizon` of 2 weeks, the `target_date` will be `"2024-11-21"`. Such task IDs therefore have **a one-to-one relationship** to values of the task IDs they are derived from.

Author: Thank you, @LucieContamin! I've cleaned up your suggestion a bit below:

```suggestion
**However, it is possible to have task ID variables that are derived directly from others.** For example, `target_date` (which represents when the outcome of interest occurs) can be calculated based on the `origin_date` and `horizon` (e.g. `origin_date + horizon * 7` to calculate weekly predictions). If the `origin_date` is `"2024-11-07"` and the `horizon` is 1 week, the `target_date` will be `"2024-11-14"`. For a `horizon` of 2 weeks, the `target_date` will be `"2024-11-21"`. Such task IDs therefore have **a one-to-one relationship** to values of the task IDs they are derived from. We strongly advise hub administrators to add the derived information and calculation in their documentation. 
```

In schema version 4.0.0, we introduced `derived_task_ids` properties to enable
hub administrators to define derived task IDs (i.e. task IDs whose values
depend on the values of other task IDs) in their hub config files. The higher level `derived_task_ids
property` sets the property globally at the hub level but can be overriden by
the round level `derived_task_ids` property. The property allows for primarily
validation functionality to ignore such task IDs when appropriate which can
significantly improve validation efficency. For more information see the
[hubValidations documentation on ignoring derived task
IDs](https://hubverse-org.github.io/hubValidations/articles/validate-pr.html#ignoring-derived-task-ids-to-improve-performance).

:::{note}

> If any of the task IDs a derived task ID depends on have `required` values, **it is essential for `derived_task_ids` to be specified**, otherwise, this will result in false validation errors. For example, if you have two required `horizon` values of 1 and 2, then you _must_ include `target_date` in `derived_task_ids`.
> Without specifying this, you will end up with a

Reviewer 2: I struggle with the first sentence a bit, minor issue but I needed it to read it multiple times to understand it, so I might suggest:

```suggestion
If any of the task IDs, which a derived task ID depends on, have `required` values, **it is essential for `derived_task_ids` to be specified**. Otherwise, this will result in false validation errors. For example, if you have two required `horizon` values of 1 and 2, then you _must_ include `target_date` in `derived_task_ids`.
Without specifying this, you will end up with a
```

Author: I don't think it's a minor issue. I also [struggled with the noun phrase "the task IDs a derived task ID depends on"](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubValidations/pull/161#discussion_r1843974147). I had previously suggested "parent task ID", but [was overruled as not accurate](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubValidations/pull/161#discussion_r1843996007). I would like to come up with a succinct descriptor of the relationship so that we can clearly label "task IDs a derived task ID depends on."

Author: Based on @LucieContamin's suggestion in slack: 

```suggestion
If any task IDs with `required` values have an associated derived task ID, **it is essential for `derived_task_ids` to be specified**. Otherwise, this will result in false validation errors. For example, if you have two required `horizon` values of 1 and 2, then you _must_ include `target_date` in `derived_task_ids`.
Without specifying this, you will end up with a
```

For example, in our [Running Example 1](#running-example-1), the task ID variables are `target`, `location`, and `origin_date`.
In this example, `target` is the target key and can only take on one value, "inc covid hosp".

#### Derived Task ID variables

> Each model output is defined on the unique combinations across the task ID
> variables. For example, across 2 `origin_date`s and 3 `location`s, there are 6
> unique combinations of tasks because both of these variables are orthogonal to
> one another. **Derived task ID variables have a direct one to one relationship
> with other variables**. One example is `target_date`, which is the date of
> occurrence of the outcome of interest. This task ID is specific for modelling
> efforts in that it is _derived_ from the `origin_date` and `horizon` task ID.
> For example, a weekly forecast with a given `origin_date` of "2024-11-07" and
> horizon of 1 has _a single valid_ `target_date` value of "2024-11-14".
> 
> If we had 4 `horizon` values, along with the 2 `origin_dates`, we would have a
> total of 8 `target_date`s. There are 192 _unique_ combinations across 4
> `horizon`s, 2 `origin_date`s, 3 `locations` and the 8 `target_dates`, but there
> are only 192/8=24 _valid and unique_ combinations because the 8 `target_date`s
> are _derived_. While this task ID is useful for modeling and visualizations, it
> must be ignored during validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each model output task is based on unique combinations of task ID values. For example, for a given `origin_date` which is a task ID which often acts as the round ID (let's say "2024-11-07"), 2 `locations`, and 2 `horizon` values, there are 4 unique tasks (1 `origin_date` × 2 `locations` × 2 `horizon`s). 

**However, some task variables are derived directly from others.** For instance, `target_date` represents when the outcome of interest occurs and is calculated based on the `origin_date` and `horizon`. If the `origin_date` is "2024-11-07" and the `horizon` is 1 week, the `target_date` will be "2024-11-14." For a `horizon` of 2 weeks, the `target_date` will be "2024-11-21." Such task IDs therefore have **a one-to-one relationship** to values of the task IDs they are derived from.

By adding a `target_date` task ID to the above example we would still have a total of 4 unique tasks since `target_date` is derived from the `origin_date` and `horizon` task IDs and each `horizon` produces a unique valid `target_date` per location. 

While derived task IDs like `target_date` are helpful for modeling and visualization, they break assumptions made during some validation tests and can also put significant strain on validation performance. As such they should generally be ignored during standard validation and custom or optional checks added to the validation workflow to check their relationship to the task IDs they are derived from (see for example documentation on the [`opt_check_tbl_horizon_timediff()`](https://hubverse-org.github.io/hubValidations/reference/opt_check_tbl_horizon_timediff.html) used to check the time difference between values in two date columns equals a defined time period defined by values in a horizon column).
```

I've jsut tried to make things simpler and clearer

In schema version 4.0.0, we introduced `derived_task_ids` properties to enable
hub administrators to define derived task IDs (i.e. task IDs whose values

> depend on the values of other task IDs). The higher level `derived_task_ids

Reviewer: ```suggestion
depend on the values of other task IDs) in their hub config files. The higher level `derived_task_ids
```

[hubValidations documentation on ignoring derived task
IDs](https://hubverse-org.github.io/hubValidations/articles/validate-pr.html#ignoring-derived-task-ids-to-improve-performance).

:::{note}
If any of the task IDs a derived task ID depends on have `required` values, **it is essential for `derived_task_ids` to be specified**, otherwise, this will result in false validation errors. For example, if you have two required `horizon` values of 1 and 2, then you _must_ include `target_date` in `derived_task_ids`.
Without specifying this, you will end up with a
[`req_vals`](https://hubverse-org.github.io/hubValidations/reference/check_tbl_values_required.html)
check failure. The table below shows an expanded grid of `horizon`, `origin_date`, and `target_date` for a single `origin_date` and two `horizons` with the results of the `req_vals` check if `derived_task_ids` is unspecified (null) or set to `target_date`:

```{table} validation will provide false errors if there are unspecified derived task IDs

| `origin_date` | `horizon` | `target_date` | valid | `derived_task_ids:` `null` | `derived_task_ids:` `["target_date"]` |

> | ------------- | --------- | ------------- | ----- | ------------------------ | ----------------------------------- |

Author: ```suggestion
| ------------- | --------- | ------------- | ----- | -------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
```

> | ----------    | --------- | ------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------ | ----------------------------------- |

Author: ```suggestion
| ------------- | --------- | ------------- | ----- | ------------------------ | ----------------------------------- |
```

| 2024-11-07 | 1 | 2024-11-14 | 🆗 | ✅ | ✅ |
| 2024-11-07 | 2 | 2024-11-21 | 🆗 | ✅ | ✅ |
| 2024-11-07 | 1 | 2024-11-21 | 🚫 | ❌ | NA |
| 2024-11-07 | 2 | 2024-11-14 | 🚫 | ❌ | NA |

```

As shown in the last column of the above table, the `req_vals` validation passes when `derived_task_ids` is set to `["target_date"]`.

> 

Reviewer: While I like the detail and understand it, I feel it would be useful for someone not steeped in the intricacies of `hubValidations` to confirm that the above detail is helpful rather than confusing.

Author: Agreed. I was trying to convey here the specific consequences of not specifying `derived_task_ids`. I think so far we've said "it causes validation errors", but there were no examples that we could point to.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the table:
- if the derived task values are correct: the validation passes whether we specify the derived information or not
- if the derived task values are incorrect:
    - the validation fail if we don't provide the derived information
    - the validation returns nothing (ignore) if we do provide the information. 
    
 It seems wrong to me and in contradiction with the "validation will provide false errors if there are unspecified derived task IDs"

Author: @LucieContamin this is exactly the kind of feedback I was looking for! The way it works for the validation is that the derived task IDs are omitted from the validation table when `derived_task_ids` is specified. 

I think it's probably best to remove the table or split it into two tables. I'll make a change and see if it works.

Author: I attempted a fix for this in 4cd5a567ceecb5e1b1b692a97d81136c65e9f077
